\section{Context: Bloom}
Our work on Dedalus has been motivated by \emph{Bloom}, a domain-specific
language (DSL) for distributed programming~\cite{bloom}. Unlike Dedalus, Bloom
is intended to be a practical programming language: we have used Bloom to build
a wide array of distributed protocols and several complete applications,
including a distributed file system. Like Datalog, Bloom is a rule-based
language in which all computation is expressed as transformations over
collections.  Like sugared \lang, Bloom includes temporal operators that allow
the programmer to indicate when certain deductions should be deferred to the
next ``timestep'' of the system or when deductions must cross a network
boundary. % XXX: connect Dedalus and Bloom more explicitly?

By developing Dedalus, our goal was to assign a model-theoretic semantics for
distributed logic programs and hence clarify the semantic ambiguities that have
plagued our prior work on distributed declarative programming
(e.g.,~\cite{Mao2009,navarro-oper-sem}). In addition, Dedalus has been essential
to the development of several program analysis tools for Bloom. Specifically,
our goal was to develop tools to help developers understand where their programs
required additional coordination in order to ensure deterministic
outcomes. Inspired by the CALM theorem~\cite{calm}, coordination analysis
identifies locations in the program's dataflow graph in which a nonmonotonic
operation is applied to a collection that has been derived asynchronously (e.g.,
via communication).  Intuitively, an asynchronously-derived collection contains
at any time some nondeterministically selected subset of its inputs, and a
nonmonotonically-derived collection may have different contents in different
executions, if applied to different subsets of its inputs.  Hence such locations
are flagged as ``points of order:'' locations at which additional program logic
(i.e., coordination) should be supplied to ensure that all program executions
(or operations on all replicas) apply the nonmonontonic operator to the same
input set.

% Explain how CALM connects to Dedalus
