\clearpage
\section{Demo Proposal}
\label{sec:demo}

In our demonstration, we will build the destructive and disorerly shopping
carts, first without coordination.  We will run each cart on a cluster of
laptops interconnected via wi-fi.  One laptop will serve as the client,
submitting requests to add or remove items from the cart.  The balance of the
laptops will function as server replicas.  The client will dispatch each
request to a random server replica.  For demonstration purposes, we will
interpose a demonic message delivery module, which operates at each server
replica, and delivers messages in a random bad order (for example, deletions
before insertions, and checkouts before all insertions and deletions).

We will display a trace of the cart's execution in real time by displaying the
messages sent by the client, and received by each server replica, in the order
they are sent or received, and explain the problems associated with each order.
We will run our points-of-order analysis, and show how the analysis captures
the message ordering problems we identified by experimentation in the
uncoordinated code.

We will add coordination to the destructive and disorderly carts and run the
coordinated implementation on our cluster of laptops.  We will benchmark the
coordinated disorderly and destructive carts, and note that the increased
coordination in the destructive cart reduces its performance relative to the
disorderly cart.  This effect should be quite visible given the latency and
jitter of the congested wi-fi spectrum in the conference room, which would
approximate the performance of a globally distributed cloud network.
